so when Dancing with the Stars first hit
the airwaves that is not what it looked
like Jeff and I were full time ballroom
dance instructors when the big TV
ballroom revival hit and this was
incredible I mean one day we would say
Foxtrot and people were like foxes
trotting and the next day they were
telling us the finer points of a good
feather step and this blew our minds I
mean all of the ballroom dance geeking
out that we had always done on why salsa
worked differently than the competitive
rumba and why tango travelled unlike the
waltz all of that just hit the public
consciousness and it changed everything
but running parallel to this excitement
the excitement that suddenly somehow we
were cool there was also this
reservation why this and why now when
Trevor and I would get together for
training seminars or just for fun we
toss each other around you know mix it
up take a break from having to lead all
the time we even came up with a system
for switching lead and follow while we
were dancing as a way of taking turns
playing fair it wasn't until we used
that system as part of a performance in
a small festival that we got an
important tap on the shoulder Lisa
O'Connell a dramaturg and director of a
playwright Center pulled us aside after
the show and said do you have any idea
how political that was so that began an
eight-year collaboration to create a
play which not only further developed
our system for switching but also
explored the impact of being locked into
a single role and what's worse being
defined by that single role because of
course classic Latin and ballroom
dancing isn't just a system of dancing
it's a way of thinking of being of
relating to each other that captured a
whole periods values there's one thing
that stayed consistent though the man
leads and the woman follows so Street
salsa championship tango it's all the
same Healy
eet's she follows so this was gender
training
you weren't just learning to dance you
were learning to man and to woman it's a
relic and in the way of relics you don't
throw it out but you need to know that
this is the past this isn't the present
it's like Shakespeare respect it revived
it great but know that this is history
this doesn't represent how we think
today so we asked ourselves if you strip
it all down what is at the core of
partner dancing well the core principle
of partner dancing is that one person
leads the other one follows the machine
works the same regardless of who's
playing what role the physics of
movement doesn't really give a crap
about your gender so if we were to
update the existing form we would need
to make it more representative of how we
interact here now in 2015 when you watch
ballroom don't just watch what's there
watch what's not the couple is always
only a man or a woman together only ever
so same sex and gender non-conforming
couples just disappear in most
mainstream international ballroom
competitions same-sex couples are rarely
recognized on the floor and in many
cases the rules prohibit them completely
try this Google image professional Latin
dancer and then look for an actual
latino person you'll be there for days
what you will get is page after page of
white straight Russian couples spray tan
to the point of mahogany there are no
black people there are no Asians no
mixed-race couples so basically
non-white people just disappeared even
within the white straight couple only
paradigm she can't be taller
he can't be shorter she can't be bolder
he can't be gentler if you were to take
a ballroom dance and translate that into
a conversation and drop that into a
movie we as a culture would never stand
for this he dictates she reacts no
relationship
gay straight or anything that we would
regard as remotely healthy or functional
looks like that and yet somehow you put
it on primetime you slap some makeup on
it throw the glitter on put it out there
as movement not as text and we as a
culture tune in and clap
we are applauding our own absence too
many people have disappeared from
partner dancing
now you just saw two men dancing
together and you thought it looked a
little strange
interesting appealing even but a little
bit odd even avid followers of the same
sex ballroom circuit can attest that
while same-sex partner dancing can be
dynamic and strong and exciting it just
doesn't quite seem to fit aesthetically
speaking if Aleta and I take the classic
closed ballroom hold this is considered
beautiful but why not this
see the standard image that the leader
must be larger and masculine than the
follower smaller and feminine this is a
stumbling point so we wanted to look at
this from a totally different angle so
what if we could keep the idea of lead
and follow but toss the idea that this
was connected to gender further what if
a couple could lead and follow each
other and then switch and then switch
back what if it could be like a
conversation taking turns listening and
speaking just like we do in life
what if we could dance like that we call
it liquid lead dancing let's try this
with a Latin dance salsa now in salsa
there's a key transitional step called
the crossbody lead we use it as
punctuation to break up the
improvisation can be a little tricky to
spot if you're not used to looking for
it so here it is one more time for the
cheap seats
and here's the action one more time nice
and slow now if we apply liquid lead
thinking to this transitional step the
crossbody lead becomes a point where the
lead in the follow can switch the person
who's following can elect to take over
the lead or the person who's leading can
choose to surrender it essentially
making it a counter cross body lead
here's how that looks in slow motion
and here's how it looked when we danced
it in the opening dance with this simple
tweak the dance moves from being a
dictation to a negotiation anyone can
lead anyone can follow and more
importantly you can change your mind now
this is only one example of how this
applies but once the blinkers come off
anything can happen so let's look at how
liquid lead thinking could apply to a
classic waltz because of course it isn't
just a system of switching leads it's a
way of thinking they can actually make
the dance itself more efficient so the
waltz the waltz is a turning dance this
means for the lead that you spend half
of the dance traveling backwards
completely blind and because of the
followers position basically no one can
see where they're going so
you're out here on the floor and then
imagine that coming right at you ah
there are actually a lot of accidents
out there that happen as a result of
this blind spot but what if the partners
were to just allow for a switch of
posture for a moment a lot of accidents
could be avoided even if one person led
the whole dance but allowed this switch
to happen it will be a lot safer while
at the same time offering new aesthetics
into the waltz because physics doesn't
give a damn about your gender
now we've danced liquid lead in clubs
convention centers and as part of first
dance the play we created with Lisa on
stages in North America and in Europe
and it never fails to engage I mean
beyond the unusual sight of seeing two
men dancing together it always evokes
and engages but why the secret lies in
what made Lisa see our initial
demonstration as political it wasn't
just that we were switching lead and
follow it's that we stayed consistent in
our presence our personality and our
power regardless of which role we were
playing we were still us and that's
where the true freedom lies not just the
freedom to switch roles but the freedom
from being defined by whichever role
you're playing the freedom to always
remain true to yourself forget what a
lead is supposed to look like or a
follow be a masculine follow or a
feminine lead just be yourself
obviously this applies off the dance
floor as well but on the floor it gives
us the perfect opportunity to update an
old paradigm reinvigorate an old relic
and make it more representative of our
era and our current way of being Jeff
and I dance party dancing all the time
with women and men and we love it but we
dance with a consciousness that this is
a historic form that can produce silence
and produce invisibility across the
spectrum of identity that we enjoy today
we invented liquid lead as a way of
stripping out all of the ideas that
don't belong to us and taking partner
dancing back to what it really always
was
the fine art of taking care of each
other